---
title: "Degrees of Freedom: Reflections on the Academic Sciences by an Entirely Unqualified Individual"
collection: projects
category: miscellaneous
permalink: /projects/2024-11-08-wgss_328
excerpt: 'Originally my final for WGSS 328 at Yale; an experimental project recording tradition and change in the academic sciences, with particular regard to gender minorities.'
date: 2024-11-08
---
# Background
In the Fall of 2024, I was enrolled in the first iteration of WGSS 328 ("I Don't Like to Argue": The Styles and Politics of Humility) at Yale. The [course description](\https://yale.instructure.com/courses/99561/assignments/syllabus\) offers some of the questions which guided the semester: "What can academic writing do besides argue? Why does critical thinking so often compel an idiom of claiming, exploring, discovering, and mastering? What might writers strive for, if not newness, rigor, excellence, or even one’s own voice? In this class, we defamiliarize and repair the habits of mind and body that have been normalized by the university." This was created as a final project for WGSS 328, meant to wrangle with tradition and change in the academic sciences.


I enrolled in WGSS 328 after two years of advocating for a more supportive and equitable environment for gender minorities in the Yale math department. At the time of writing, I am co-president of Dimensions, Yale's only student group for gender minorities in the mathematics, and have served on the department's [climate committee](\https://math.yale.edu/yale-math-statement-diversity-equity-inclusion-and-belonging\) for two years. A reflection on Dimensions and DEIB efforts with the climate committee occur later in the project here (link later) and here (also link later), respectively. 

Of all that I witnessed, much felt too mundane to be worth discussing. It felt impossible, too, to suggest anything; what ideas–math or not–could I possibly offer to a room full of mathematicians significantly more qualified than I? I found it uncomfortable and nearly offensive to express opinions without undermining myself first. Even now, with the understanding that scientists may read these words, I find the need to append self-abasement to the title of my project. 

These senses of self-imposed smallness and the mundanity of harm are threads I attempt to draw upon in this work. 

## Disclaimer
I feel the need to raise the obvious disclaimer that there is real contradiction and irony in deconstructing academic authority at Yale. I often think that such a class would be ridiculed, if not for occurring at an institution which excels at the various patterns my assigned readings suggest repairing or rejecting. Personally, I always experience a knee-jerk aversion to institutionalizing radicalism in any form (though I am open to hearing arguments for it).

## Structure and Form
This project is structured into three parts. Firstly, with admirable intentions, I aim to record some of the history of the Yale math department. My thanks to Yale mathematics Professor Emeritus Richard Beals, who aided my research greatly by sharing his manuscript detailing precisely this. 

Secondly, I author an experimental collection of essays, shorter excerpts, and other multimedia regarding scientific academia, with particular regard to mathematics. This part is both personal, with interviews (link) and attempts to record the personal side (link) of math, as well as general (link), where I examine the implications of liberating efforts in mathematics beyond Yale and the self. 

Lastly, I detail work which took form as action, both before the start of WGSS 328 and thereafter. Much of this project occurs in the form of thought and record; while these are  writing extensively about climate committee and Dimensions, I found it meaningful to spend my 


# title i guess
It seems that a critical of reading of the humanities today involves, in part, a simultaneous taking and rejection of previous works, even those deemed seminal. There is an acknowledgment of the colonial and capitalist roots in Western scholarship, and it is possible to study the humanities in perhaps a more "conscious" manner today. These paradigm shifts are not easy; to reject a popular idea is to metaphorically remove the foundations of those which came after. But in mathematics, the problem is twofold. There is no notion of falsehood in mathematics, and there is no mathematical untruth which can become true through a discriminatory lens. This is a double-edged sword; in a sense, the purity of mathematics has made it immune to human biases and attempts to reshape the world. At the same time, it has been weaponized to justify these very actions under the guise of ultimate authority and truth. To reject a mathematical idea is to reject truth itself, and, rather than removing the ideological or philosophical roots of an idea in the humanities, it axiomatically destroys all of the mathematics that have ever followed. 

The consensus in mathematics seems to be, then, that the field is exempt from self-scrutiny. Many argue the existence of a distinction between mathematics itself and its misapplications. Some suggest a mathematicians is, in a sense, forced to be race and gender-blind (see: the treatment of Sophie Germain and Emmy Noether by mathematicians. Notably, Noether was forced to lecture under a male name due to the criticism of the \textit{philosophy} department at Göttingen, not Hilbert and Klein, who both invited her there), given that mathematics, regardless of who has proven it, creates something fundamentally irrefutable. But to treat different people with the same attitude produces different results if these two individuals are fundamentally viewed as different within society. Hence blindness is not enough. The truth remains that mathematics ability has implications far beyond the walls of the university, and that there are statistically significant discrepancies in performance and interest between racial, socioeconomic, and gendered groups. 

In my final project, I would like to explore the meaning of tradition, rejection, and revolution in the context of mathematics. I took WGSS 328 with the intention of understanding my place as a rather unremarkable, but very un-male mathematician; I see now that I am ending the class equally confused. I have held so much anger, disappointment, and hatred. I have never understood the feelings of failure and rejection and sheer uselessness that afflict me in mathematics, much less how they have always seemed accidentally inflicted. Nor can I express the personal importance of mathematics, which started as a random selection on my Common Application and ended as the primary guiding principle in my life. I am tired of being angry, and I see now that the harm is as mundane and random as it is systematic and organized. I will never not admire minds who would never do the same for my own. 
