---
title: "The Drama of the California Mathematics Framework"
excerpt: "An instance in which inclusion-oriented mathematics fails spectacularly"
collection: wgss_posts
date: 2024-11-17
permalink: /wgss_project/2024/11/17/
---
***An instance in which inclusion-oriented mathematics fails spectacularly***

In 2023, the California State Board of Education approved a [revised math framework](https://www.cde.ca.gov/nr/ne/yr23/yr23rel54.asp) (CMF) for teaching math in public schools. Designed with the intention of "affirm[ing] California’s commitment to ensuring equity and excellence in math learning for all students," the guidelines were highly controversial and considered by many mathematicians to be misguided. Among the changes included a new focus on data analysis:

> Connect learning to the “real world” through authentic examples and use of data, prompting students to ask and answer meaningful questions. Adding authenticity to lessons helps teachers answer students’ questions around “why do I need to learn this?”

as well as a "detracking" policy that encouraged removing Algebra 1 from middle school curriculums. 

Of course, this perspective was fraught with issues and a blatant misunderstanding of mathematics and math educaiton. Stanford Math's Director of Undergraduate Studies, Brian Conrad, contributed to several revisions of the framework and opposed many of its questionable policies. His public comments are posted on his website [here](https://sites.google.com/view/publiccommentsonthecmf/), and his article on it was [published](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2023/10/california-math-framework-algebra/675509/) by *The Atlantic* in October 2023:

> The CMF pitches relatively new courses, branded as “data science,” both as an alternative to a second year of algebra and as an entry point into fast-growing career fields. But the course name is something of a misnomer. [...] The ability to do actual data science rests on math skills that have been taught for eons. Data literacy would be a better name for the most widely taught high-school data-science classes, which were developed by UCLA’s statistics department and my own university’s Graduate School of Education. To be sure, schools should be teaching citizens enough about statistics and data to follow the news and make educated [...] decisions. [...] But much as a music-appreciation course won’t teach you how to play a piano, data literacy is not data science.

> [...] the CMF is notably skeptical of efforts to group students in math class according to ability, out of a fear that disadvantaged students will be placed in low-expectation tracks that they can never escape. But for some reason, shunting them away from advanced math is portrayed as progress. The STEM fields won’t increase their diversity through math classes that contain very little math.

According to the same article, "A  multiracial national coalition of more than 1,700 quantitative experts from higher education and industry strongly objected to the early drafts. Faculty in the University of California and California State University systems wrote letters warning state officials against prematurely steering students away from algebra-intensive academic and career options." In its comment period, opinions on the CMF were everywhere; however, what I found equally concerning was the poorly-researched coverage it attracted.

Some individuals took the CMF as ["Jo Boaler and the Woke Math Death Spiral,"](https://stanfordreview.org/jo-boaler-and-the-woke-math-death-spiral/) as one undergraduate *Stanford Review* writer would put it. Boaler, a proponent of the CMF, is a highly controversial figure. In particular, she leveraged her claimed expertise in education to serve as a consultant for underfunded school districts, where she charged thousands of dollars hourly. Boaler is not a mathematician, and as mentioned above, many in the mathematics coomunity pushed back against the CMF and some of her recommendations.

However, as the "Woke Math Death Spiral" views it,

>  [...] This debacle epitomizes the general dubiousness of ideology-driven research and elite universities’ complicity in promoting it. It is within elite institutions such as Stanford where DEI ideologues like Boaler are given ample funding and leeway to perform shoddy research driven by social justice rather than academic rigor, as highlighted by the numerous concerns regarding her methodologies from mathematics professor Brian Conrad.

There should be no pathways for poor research to succeed. However, pitting "academic rigor," symbolized by Conrad, against "DEI ideologues" is intentionally misleading. Mathematics curriculums can be changed without sacrificing rigor. The shabby execution of the CMF is indeed concerning; perhaps it signals that uninformed decisions are being made in the interest of political trends. However, "the abandonment of rigor in favor of political signaling" pits math against inclusion in a false dilemma. 

*[Return to Written Work](\pages/wgss_project/essays/)*