---
title: "Interviews"
excerpt: "Interviews on Yale, women in STEM, and more."
collection: wgss_posts
date: 2024-12-17
permalink: /wgss_project/2024/12/17/
---

***Interviews on Yale, women in STEM, and more.***

*Much of the following was taken from a blog post I wrote for Dimensions.*

In 2019, MIT's *Women in Mathematics* organization published a damning "National Mathematics Survey." Data was solicited from Harvard, MIT, Yale, Princeton, and Brown students. And while response rates varied and were likely affected by self-selection, the qualitative data is enough to light the fire. 

Comments respondents were told:
> You don’t count as a girl because you’re good at math

> You’re the only girl I know who is good at math

> She does math AND is hot, it’s crazy

Descriptions of disregard for women in mathematics:
> Sometimes people don’t want to work with me because I’m a girl – the most common experience I have is explaining something to a male classmate, only to have him ask another male classmate to validate what I’ve said. 

> Being a female in math is difficult.  I will never be as respected as my male peers. Many an occasion occurs when collaborating where my ideas are completely disregarded as the only female in the room until they have exhausted all their ideas and then finally consider it.

> One of my problem set partners mentioned that I should have an easy time finding a summer internship because I’m a girl.

> If a female student asked a stupid question my friend used to say to me “that’s one less girl we have to compete with”

Comments from mathematics faculty: 
> Grad student indicated that he felt that there was no need to be concerned about the number of women in math or to try to encourage more women to take math. He also stated that he would not mentor a female student in the same way he would mentor a male student because she might falsely charge him with sexual harassment. When I confided to a professor that I was having difficulty in his class because I didn’t have a study group to work with in an almost exclusively male environment, his response was to tell me that if I wasn’t able to keep up with the class, perhaps I should request a tutor or drop the course in favor of an easier one. Professor stated that women simply came in with less math preparation in high school, and that there was nothing the university could do to fix that. Professor insinuated that I might not be good enough at math to do a senior thesis, and that I should instead opt for a senior seminar. Interestingly, the only other people I have found who heard this from him seem to be women.

> "I didn’t finish that pset last week.” “Of course, look who you were working with” (a group of girls)

> A visiting professor walked through at office hours for my math class and commented how much more attractive girls in math were now than in his day.

> I’ve had a Math professor looking me up and down with surprise before talking to me and asking me if I’m sure I can handle maths research.

In conducting my own interviews, I found it difficult to preserve anonymity. Many respondents expressed concerns about privacy; most who had experienced discrimination were the only person with their identifiers (e.g. race, gender) in their group, and could not describe their experiences without revealing enough to risk retaliation. As a result, I decided to compile their experiences in one post. 

* Noticeably small (optimistically, < 30%) proportion of women and gender minorities in math classes

* Insinuation from peers that women struggle with math for biological reasons

* Insinuation from peers that if a woman succeeds at math, it is an exception rather than something normal

* Explicitly saying or implying that women who receive research or job opportunities only did so due to their gender identity

* Women in math are unattractive

* Attractive women in math are intellectually inferior

* Making persistent and unwanted advances on women, sometimes to the extent where they feel unsafe going to office hours or class

* Female ULAs receiving more requests for help from female students outside of scheduled office hours. Feeling consequent pressure to work outside the regular hours shared with male ULA peers, while being paid the same wage

* Male students only seeking advice from other men. At student panels, lines form to ask men for advice, even when there are women with the same qualifications available to speak nearby

* Transphobic comments and actions

* Advisors expressing concern about female students' courseload, despite excellent grades. Many times, male peers with the same schedule and advisors did not receive similar comments.

The Yale math department’s Climate Committee is a small group devoted to improving DEIB within the major. However, it isn’t necessarily the most visible organization, and whether or not undergraduates in particular actually feel supported is up for debate. From a 2023 survey on the Yale math department conducted by the Poorvu Center: 

> Respondents were split in whether they felt the department is making sufficient effort towards inclusion (57% agreed and 43% disagreed or felt neutral). 

> A subtle dichotomy emerged in the qualitative data, suggesting much of the department is working towards an improved climate, though a subset of the department does not engage or is perceived as unsupportive towards DEI&B work.”

How much argument is needed to say that 43% is unacceptable? In 2024, how can we continue to convince ourselves that even DEIB–a band-aid solution at best–is too much? And yet, over and over, my peers and I find  ourselves being interrogated. Why is DEIB important in mathematics? What do numbers have to do with gender? And aren’t we supposed to value objectivity (read: viewing women as equals is somehow biased and unfair)? What else needs be done, anyways? 

It is difficult and tiring enough to fight for inclusion, let alone justify why the fight is even worthwhile. Are my words wasted on someone who can’t see what seems so obvious to me? If I gave someone the benefit of the doubt, where would I even start? Or, even worse: what if all my anger and soapboxing simply turns prospective women away from the field? But I remember, too, how discouraging it can feel to exist without a support system. How many mathematicians are dissuaded from the field because of discriminatory experiences? 


Striving for an equitable, safe, and respectful environment for our peers and coworkers is not “too much.” It is a baseline expression of empathy and social justice. 

*[Return to Written Work](\pages/wgss_project/essays/)*