---
title: "Taking Chances"
excerpt: "My time at the Queens Experience in Discrete Mathematics (QED) REU"
collection: wgss_posts
date: 2024-11-14
permalink: /wgss_project/2024/11/14/
---
***My time at the Queens Experience in Discrete Mathematics REU***

In Spring 2024, as I took the Metro North back to Yale, I texted a friend about CUNY York College: "it's [...] what I think college is supposed to be." There, I had just presented my math research for the Queens Experience in Discrete Mathematics (QED) REU, along with the rest of my research cohort. Queens was different from Yale in ways I didn't know I needed; far from my home campus, I felt enabled to learn. 

Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REUs) are programs funded by the National Science Foundation that give many undergraduates their first experiences in academic research. Many are notoriously competitive; students with dreams of graduate school clamor for the opportunity to stick one on their resume. The QED REU is unconventional: it is open only to students in New York, and it runs part-time throughout the academic year, as opposed to the summer. 

Suffice to say, as a Yale student, I was not eligible to participate in a traditional manner. Instead, I joined the program without funding, taking the 2.5 hour train from Yale to CUNY Baruch and CUNY York to meet with my research supervisors. QED became my first experience in math research, and it changed my life. The grace that the program head, Professor Rishi Nath, showed me will never be lost upon me. 

Ways in which QED rewired the way I think about math:

1. Math is for everyone.
    * I met mathematicians of all backgrounds, races, and genders; some were my peers and others were professors. My internalized conception of what a mathematician was "supposed" completely vanished.
    * QED was, and continues to be, the only math space I can recall with a strong proportion of women (~50%).

2. Professor Rishi Nath is a revolutionary.
    * He has created the most beautiful community in QED and is dedicated to serving NYC and mathematics in a profoundly radical way. From watching him lead, I have come to understand what alternative mathematics can look like. 
    * He inspires me as a person, not just an academic. He used to write problems for the Duluth REU and he has awesome posts on the  *Asian American Writers' Workshop* webpage!

3. Mathematicians are capable of grace.
    * The department at CUNY is so kind! This not to say that others are particularly unkind, simply that community matters and is picked up upon by individuals. Is it wild to suggest that a good mathematics program ought to be a supportive, kind one?
    * Rishi gave me a chance to prove myself. With QED, I don't know if any of my past jobs or internships would have given me a second glance. How many people out there are willing to bet on someone who needs a push?

I am forever grateful for QED; it takes so much community and so many chances to support a single person. 

*[Return to Written Work](\pages/wgss_project/essays/)*