---
title: "Beyond Genius"
excerpt: "John von Neumann, genius, and the desire to be great"
collection: wgss_posts
date: 2024-11-30
permalink: /wgss_project/2024/11/30/
---
***John von Neumann, genius, and the desire to be great***


On the Wikipedia page, ["List of things named after John von Neumann,"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_things_named_after_John_von_Neumann) there are easily 50-something theorems, conjectures, and equations––none of them trivial––on ergodic theory, quantum mechanics, and everything in between. During my freshman year of college, my friend, obsessed with the Hungarian mathematician, would gleefully point out one accomplishment after another on his Wiki page to me. To convey the scope of his genius to someone unfamiliar is somewhat impossible. He was great in a time of greatness: his peers included Fejér, Hilbert, Weyl, Pólya, Mandelbrot, Ulam, and associates of Manhattan Project. He frequented Princeton, the Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL), Göttingen. A spectacular force in game thoery, spectral graph theory, ergodic theory, algebra, set theory, physics, computing, biology, economics. A [crater on the Moon named after him](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Von_Neumann_(crater)). I woud listen to my friend waxing poetic and just laugh.

There is something unexpected about scientists––who usually seem chronically unimpressed and stoic––fangirling over great minds. During my time at Los Alamos, there was a near-comical obsession with Oppenheimer, though the recent release of the titular movie was somewhat to blame. He was jokingly referred to as "Oppie." Roads, libraries, and even restaurant dishes were named after him. Upon a visit a cafe where Oppenheimer had once eaten, the cups he drank out of had been saved for display. I even heard of employees making trips to visit a bathroom he had once used, though I have yet to actually confirm its existence. At Yale, too, I listened to senior faculty murmuring in excitedly about Stokes' former exam papers at Cambridge, or old notes of Newton's held in the Beinecke Library. It's a bit like listening in on a misunderstood cult talking about their gods. But now I'm a true believer. 

In a society gripped by a fascination with child prodigies, talent, and genius, mathematics stands out. Beyond musical virtuosos, the precocious individuals we hear about most often are mathematicians[^1]. And while there are incredible late mathematical bloomers––June Huh, for example––it seems that, generally, truly exceptional talent in math can be identified early[^2]. The more math I learned, the more I found myself partitioning mathematics into two groups: the output of geniuses, and everything else. Every failure became amplified: would John von Neumann make a mistake in *his* undergraduate studies? And on some particularly insecure nights, I would lay in bed and imagined how nice (and ridiculous) it would be to ask a genie to make me smarter.

[^1]: [Wikipedia's list](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_child_prodigies ) is the first search result on Google for "child prodigy," and is almost entirely mathematicians. The next result, on [Britannica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_child_prodigies ), does the same. 

[^2]: The meaning of "greatness" or "prodigy" is somewhat ill-defined. Here we take the view commonly applied in psychology, where a child is able to produce meaningful contributions to a field comparable to those of an influential adult. 


But I think, too, of Mychal Denzel Smith's essay, [*Scholar's Mate,*](https://www.thebeliever.net/scholars-mate/) in which he profiles the chess hustlers of New York City:

> These chess players, a significant number of them black men, in my experience, will never receive formal recognition from FIDE, the International Chess Federation, but continue to exist as versions of the titular “little man at Chehaw Station” in Ralph Ellison’s 1978 essay: at the end of the essay, a young Ellison is confounded by his discovery of a room full of coal heavers who are passionately arguing about opera. They are as knowledgeable as they are, Ellison learns, because they also work as extras in productions staged by the Metropolitan Opera. The anecdote bolsters Ellison’s assertion throughout the essay that, in the US, culture filters out into unexpected places, and the unexpected people in those places are capable of offering perspectives that require serious consideration. “Many of us,” he writes, “by the way, read our first Hemingway, Fitzgerald, Mann in barbershops.”

I like to imagine Smith's conception of culture as a possibility for mathematics, though necessarily taking a different shape. I think of mathematicians who were not human calculators at the age of 13, or I think of [David Smith](https://the-orangery.weebly.com), a jigsaw puzzle enthusiast who recently found an elusive tiling mathematicians had been seeking for decades. I think of all the mathematicians in between: those whose research output might be characterized as "average" or "unremarkable," those who lecture and teach as their primary output, those who both struggled and published influential papers. These people seem to fall between the cracks of our recognition. I am struck by this similarity to gender economics; just as feminine labor remains unquantifiable by traditional (and male-developed) metrics, I wonder how to account for mathematics in all its forms.

In *Ephemera as Evidence: Introductory Notes to Queer Acts,* José Esteban Muñoz challenges traditional forms of evidence and rigor, defying "an imperative to maintain the stability of evidence *despite* the acknowledgement that evdience is always arleady contingent under the pressure of post-structuralist and post-axiological inquiry." Though interest in academic genius is moreso due to its exceptional ability than an institutionally-defined ideal, I am inspired Muñoz's desire to take serious what has historically been deemed unserious. In turning towards the untraditional mathematician, I envision alternative forms of greatness not for fear of "mediocrity," but to imagine something different altogether. 

*[Return to Written Work](\pages/wgss_project/essays/)*